# SwingApplicationPlatform
A modern update to the old JSR-296 Swing Application Framework...

The Swing Application Platform (SAP) Project was born out of frustration. While Hans Muller, et al, created an application framework in 2005 – 2006/7, proposed for incorporation into the Java Development Kit 7 (codenamed: Dolphin, at the time), it was not included in the JDK release. Since that proposal fell through, no one else has created a decent application framework for Java J2SE/Swing desktop applications. However, in the intervening years, many application frameworks for web applications have been developed, leaving the desktop application as a relic of the past.

While starting development on the Northwind Traders Basic Edition (NTA) Project, we discovered that, while the application framework from 2006 was not included in the JDK, we could still use it for our application’s life cycle and resource injection. However, the NTA Project was growing and becoming a monolithic application. The 2006 framework not only did not help us to keep our project from becoming monolithic, but due to the design of that framework, monolithic applications were actually encouraged. 

As the NTA Project grew, we realized that we would have an issue in providing updates to our end users, so decided to port that project to a module architecture. Once we refactored the NTA Project, we were shocked to discover that the 2006 framework was not up to the task of performing its duties in a modular architected project. This was due to the fact that the 2006 framework recursed through, or at least needed access to, the other package trees in the project in order to build its action and resource maps, and to inject resources into the various components that make up an application.

This led the NTA Project team to start doing research into alternative desktop application frameworks. Much to the team’s disappointment, no viable candidates were found. All of the frameworks that are available on the internet were designed for web-based applications. However, the purpose of the NTA Project is specifically to create a desktop application for owner/operator truck drivers who do not always have access to the internet.

Therefore, the NTA Project team began discussing what they could do to solve the dilemma in which they had found themselves. Due to the 2006 framework not understanding modular design and architecture, the NTA Project was brought to a standstill. The primary reason that the team decided to move to the modular project architecture was to allow for updates to be distributed in an automated manner, applied to the users’ copies of the application, and the application be automatically restarted, if required. Furthermore, since the NTA Project Specifications laid the groundwork for two more editions of the application in the future, the team believed that it would be beneficial to have the Basic Edition built modularly in order to only need to create additional modules to compound the Basic Edition into the next edition of the application.

This being the requirement of the NTA Project, leads us to believe that there are multiple other projects out there that could also benefit from an application platform that provides as much of everything that an application would require as a library. This would allow developers to concentrate on the business logic of their projects, without the need of reinventing the wheel for every project they start.

